Overview
Typical heartbeat
Typical heartbeat
Enlarge image
A heart arrhythmia (uh-RITH-me-uh) is an irregular heartbeat. A heart arrhythmia happens when the electrical signals that tell the heart to beat don't work as they should. The heart may beat too fast or too slow. Or the pattern of the heartbeat may be inconsistent.

A heart arrhythmia may feel like a fluttering, pounding or racing heartbeat. Some heart arrhythmias are harmless. Others may cause life-threatening symptoms.

There are times when it is OK to have a fast or slow heartbeat. For example, the heart may beat faster with exercise or slow down during sleep.

Heart arrhythmia treatment may include medicines, devices such as pacemakers, or a procedure or surgery. The goals of treatment are to control or get rid of fast, slow or otherwise irregular heartbeats. A heart-healthy lifestyle can help prevent heart damage that can trigger some heart arrhythmias.

Another name for heart arrhythmia is cardiac arrhythmia.

Types
In general, heart arrhythmias are grouped by the speed of the heart rate. For example:

Tachycardia (tak-ih-KAHR-dee-uh) is a fast heartbeat. The heart rate is greater than 100 beats a minute.
Bradycardia (brad-e-KAHR-dee-uh) is a slow heartbeat. The heart rate is less than 60 beats a minute.
Fast heartbeat, called tachycardia
Types of tachycardias include:

Atrial fibrillation , also called AFib. Chaotic heart signaling causes an irregular and often very fast heartbeat. AFib may be temporary and start and stop on its own. Sometimes the irregular heartbeat may not stop unless treated. AFib has been linked to stroke.
Atrial flutter. Atrial flutter is similar to AFib, but the heartbeats are more organized. Atrial flutter also is linked to stroke.
Supraventricular tachycardia. This broad term includes irregular heartbeats that start above the lower heart chambers, called the ventricles. Supraventricular tachycardia causes a pounding heartbeat that starts and stops suddenly.
Ventricular fibrillation. Rapid, chaotic electrical signals cause the lower heart chambers to tremble instead of squeezing in a coordinated way. This serious heart condition can lead to death if the heart isn't reset to a regular heart rhythm within minutes. Most people with ventricular fibrillation have an underlying heart disease or had a serious injury.
Ventricular tachycardia. This rapid, irregular heartbeat starts with faulty electrical signals in the lower heart chambers, called the ventricles. The rapid heartbeat doesn't let the ventricles properly fill with blood. So the heart may not be able to pump enough blood to the body. Ventricular tachycardia may not cause serious concerns in people with otherwise healthy hearts. In those with heart disease, ventricular tachycardia can be an emergency that needs medical care right away.
Slow heartbeat, called bradycardia
A heart rate below 60 beats a minute is called bradycardia. But a low resting heart rate doesn't always mean there's trouble with the heart. If you're physically fit, your heart may be able to pump enough blood to the body with less than 60 beats a minute.

If you have a slow heart rate and your heart isn't pumping enough blood, you may have a type of bradycardia. Types of bradycardias include:

Sick sinus syndrome. The sinus node sets the pace of the heart. If the node doesn't work as it should, the heartbeat may switch between too slow and too fast. Sick sinus syndrome can be caused by scarring near the sinus node that slows, disrupts or blocks heartbeat signals. The condition is most common among older adults.
Conduction block. A block of the heart's electrical pathways can cause the signals that trigger the heartbeats to slow down or stop. Some blocks may cause no symptoms. Others may cause skipped beats or slowed heartbeats.
Premature heartbeats
Premature heartbeats are extra beats that occur one at a time. Sometimes they happen in patterns that alternate with a regular heartbeat.

If the extra beats come from the top chamber of the heart, they are called premature atrial contractions. Your healthcare team may call them PACs.
If they come from the bottom chamber, they are called premature ventricular contractions. You may hear them called PVCs.
A premature heartbeat may feel like your heart skipped a beat. These extra beats are generally not a concern. They rarely mean you have a more serious condition. Still, a premature beat can trigger an irregular heartbeat that lasts a long time, especially in people with heart disease. Sometimes, having very frequent premature ventricular beats may lead to a weak heart.

Premature heartbeats may occur at rest. Stress, heavy exercise and the use of stimulants, such as caffeine or nicotine, also may cause premature heartbeats.

Symptoms
A heart arrhythmia may not cause any symptoms. The irregular heartbeat may be found during a health checkup for another reason.

Symptoms of an arrhythmia may include:

A fluttering, pounding or racing feeling in the chest.
A fast heartbeat.
A slow heartbeat.
Chest pain.
Shortness of breath.
Other symptoms may include:

Anxiety.
Feeling very tired.
Lightheadedness or dizziness.
Sweating.
Fainting or almost fainting.
When to see a doctor
If you feel like your heart is beating too fast or too slow, or it's skipping a beat, make an appointment for a health checkup. You may be told to see a doctor trained in heart diseases, called a cardiologist.

Get emergency medical care if you have these symptoms:

Chest pain.
Shortness of breath.
Fainting.

Diagnosis
To diagnose a heart arrhythmia, a healthcare professional examines you and asks about your medical history and symptoms.

You may have tests to check your heart and to look for health conditions that can cause an irregular heartbeat.

Tests
Tests to diagnose a heart arrhythmia may include:

Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG). This quick test measures the electrical activity of the heart. It can show how fast or how slow the heart is beating. Sticky patches with sensors on them go on the chest and sometimes the arms or legs. Wires connect the sensors to a computer, which displays or prints results.
Holter monitor. This portable ECG device can be worn for a day or more to record the heart's activity during daily activities.
Event recorder. This portable ECG device is worn for up to 30 days or until an arrhythmia or symptoms occur. You typically press a button when symptoms occur.
Echocardiogram. This test uses sound waves to take pictures of the beating heart. It can show the structure of the heart and heart valves. It can measure the strength of the heart. It also shows how blood flows through the heart.
Implantable loop recorder. If symptoms don't happen very often, an event recorder may be placed under the skin in the chest area. The device continuously records the heart's electrical activity. It can find irregular heart rhythms.
If an irregular heartbeat is not found during those tests, a healthcare professional may suggest more tests to try to trigger the arrhythmia. These tests may include:

Stress test. Some arrhythmias are triggered or worsened by exercise. During a stress test, the heart's activity is watched while you ride on a stationary bicycle or walk on a treadmill. If you can't exercise, you may get medicine that affects the heart like exercise does.
Tilt table test. This test may be done if you've had fainting spells. Your heart rate and blood pressure are checked as you lie flat on a table. The table is then tilted to put you in a standing position. A healthcare professional watches how your heart and nervous system respond to changes in the table's position.
Electrophysiological testing and mapping. This test, also called an EP study, can confirm a diagnosis of tachycardia or find out where in the heart the faulty signaling occurs. An EP study is mostly used to diagnose isolated arrythmias.

An EP study is done in the hospital. One or more thin, flexible tubes are guided through a blood vessel, usually in the groin, to various areas in the heart. Sensors on the tips of the tubes record the heart's electrical activity. An EP study shows how electrical signals spread through the heart during each heartbeat.

Care at Mayo Clinic
Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your heart arrhythmia-related health concerns.
Start Here

More Information
Heart arrhythmia care at Mayo Clinic
Echocardiogram
Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG)
Show more related information
Treatment
Treatment for a heart arrhythmia depends on whether the heart is beating too fast or too slow. Some heart arrhythmias do not need treatment. Your healthcare team may suggest regular checkups to watch your condition.

Heart arrhythmia treatment is usually only needed if the irregular heartbeat causes significant symptoms or puts you at risk of more-serious heart conditions. Treatment for heart arrhythmias may include medicines, special actions called vagal maneuvers, procedures or surgery.

Medicines
Medicines used to treat heart arrhythmias depend on the type of irregular heartbeat and possible complications.

For example, most people with tachycardia get medicine to control the heart rate and rhythm.

If you have atrial fibrillation, you may get blood thinners to prevent blood clots.

Therapies
Other treatments for heart arrhythmias include:

Vagal maneuvers. These are simple but specific actions that can slow the heart rate. They include coughing, bearing down as if having a bowel movement and putting an ice pack on the face. These actions affect the vagus nerve. The nerve helps control the heartbeat. Vagal maneuvers may be recommended if you have a very fast heartbeat due to supraventricular tachycardia. Vagal maneuvers don't work for all types of arrhythmias.
Cardioversion. Paddles or patches on the chest give an electrical shock to the heart and help reset the heart rhythm. Cardioversion is typically used when vagal maneuvers and medicines don't work. Your healthcare team may recommend this treatment if you have a certain type of heart arrhythmia, such as atrial fibrillation.
Surgery or other procedures
Cardiac catheter ablation
Cardiac catheter ablation
Enlarge image
Pacemakers, defibrillator
Pacemakers, defibrillator
Enlarge image
Treatment for heart arrhythmias also may involve a procedure or surgery to place a heart device in your body. Sometimes, open-heart surgery is needed to stop or prevent an irregular heartbeat.

Types of procedures and surgeries used to treat heart arrhythmias include:

Catheter ablation. In this procedure, the doctor places one or more catheters into blood vessels to the heart. Sensors at the catheter tips use heat or cold energy to create tiny scars in your heart. The scars block irregular heart signals and restore the heartbeat.
Pacemaker. If slow heartbeats don't have a cause that can be fixed, a pacemaker may be needed. A pacemaker is a small device that's placed in the chest to help control the heartbeat.
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, also called an ICD. This device is placed under the skin near the collarbone. It continuously checks the heart rhythm. If the device finds an irregular heartbeat, it sends out low- or high-energy shocks to reset the heart's rhythm.

You may need this device if you have a high risk of dangerously fast or irregular heartbeats in the lower heart chambers. Such conditions are called ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation. Other reasons for an ICD include a history of sudden cardiac arrest or conditions that increase its risk.

Maze procedure. In the maze procedure, a surgeon makes tiny cuts in the upper half of the heart to create a pattern of scar tissue. The pattern is called a maze. The heart's signals can't pass through scar tissue. This treatment can block stray electrical heart signals that cause some types of fast heartbeats.

The maze procedure is usually only done if you don't get better with other treatments or if you're already having open-heart surgery for another reason.

Coronary bypass graft surgery. If you have severe coronary artery disease with an irregular heartbeat, you may need this type of heart surgery. The surgery creates a new path for blood to flow around a blocked or partially blocked artery in the heart.
After treatment for irregular heartbeats, it's important to get regular health checkups. Take your medicines as directed. Tell your healthcare team if your symptoms get worse.