Cardiomyopathy
What Is Cardiomyopathy?
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
healthcare provider checks female patients heart with stethoscopeCardiomyopathy is a disease that weakens the heart muscle. This makes it harder for your heart to pump blood. The word "cardiomyopathy" means "heart muscle disease."

Learn more about how the heart works

Cardiomyopathy can affect people of any sex, race, or age. There are several types of cardiomyopathy and many causes and risk factors. Young adults, even athletes, are at risk for a type of cardiomyopathy called hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Peripartum cardiomyopathy affects some women, before, during, or soon after pregnancy. Newborns and children can have cardiomyopathy.

Depending on the type of cardiomyopathy that you have, your heart muscle may become thicker, stiffer, or larger than normal. These changes weaken the heart and may cause an irregular heartbeat, heart failure, or a life-threatening event such as cardiac arrest or cardiogenic shock.

Cardiomyopathy may be caused by your genes  , other medical conditions, unhealthy lifestyle factors, or extreme stress. However, many times, the cause of cardiomyopathy is not known.

People with cardiomyopathy may have shortness of breath, fatigue  , dizziness and fainting, swelling in the ankles or legs, or chest pain as the disease gets worse. Your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms  and order tests to diagnose cardiomyopathy. Echocardiography is the most common test. Genetic  tests may identify the cause of your cardiomyopathy and help assess the risk of cardiomyopathy in blood relatives.

Some people have no cardiomyopathy symptoms and may not need treatment. Even so, some providers may recommend treatment to prevent progression of the disease.

Cardiomyopathy treatments include medicines, procedures, healthy lifestyle changes, implanted devices, and therapy to lower stress. Treatments may not fix the problem with your heart, but they may lower symptoms, prevent the disease from getting worse, and reduce the chance of sudden death. Talk with your provider to set up a treatment plan to improve your quality of life.

Cardiomyopathy
Diagnosis
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
Your healthcare provider may screen you for cardiomyopathy if a close relative has this condition or has had another serious heart condition. Your healthcare provider will ask whether people in your family have died suddenly.

Your provider may also notice signs  of cardiomyopathy during a routine exam. If you have symptoms of heart weakness, your provider will order tests:

Heart tests and procedures such as imaging tests, electrocardiograms, and stress tests check the size and shape of your heart and assess how well it is working. They may also provide other information about the heart.
Blood tests check the levels of substances in your blood that change if you have cardiomyopathy or complications such as heart failure.
 Genetic  testing can identify  inherited  types of cardiomyopathy. This is important if you or a blood relative has cardiomyopathy or another heart condition that runs in families. A genetic counselor can help you through the process.
Be sure to let your provider know if you're planning a pregnancy or if you are pregnant. Not all tests and procedures are safe for pregnant women.

Heart imaging and exams
Your provider will order imaging tests to assess your heart’s shape and its ability to pump blood.

Echocardiogram, or echo, uses sound waves to create moving pictures of your heart. The pictures show the size and shape of your heart and how well it is pumping blood.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses radio waves, magnets, and a computer to create detailed pictures of your heart. This noninvasive test can provide information about the type and seriousness of heart disease to help find the best way to treat your condition.
Cardiac computed tomography (CT) scan, also called a “CAT scan,” uses X-rays to take detailed pictures of your heart and its blood vessels. With this noninvasive test, computers use the pictures to create a three-dimensional model of your heart.
A chest X-ray uses fast imaging to look at the structures in and around your chest. It can help diagnose and check conditions such as heart failure.
An electrocardiogram detects and records your heart’s electrical activity. It is also called an ECG or EKG. An ECG can show how fast your heart is beating. It also shows the rhythm of your heartbeats and the pattern of electrical impulses passing through your heart.
A heart stress test checks how your heart works under stress. During stress testing, you exercise on a treadmill or a stationary bike to make your heart beat quickly. If you can’t exercise, your provider may give you medicine to make your heart work harder, as it would during exercise. To check for low blood flow to your heart muscle, your provider will use an ECG, echocardiogram, or another imaging test while you exercise.

Understanding Ejection Fraction
When you and your provider talk about the results of an echocardiogram, you'll probably hear the term "ejection fraction." This is the percentage of blood that your heart pumps out with every heartbeat. A normal ejection fraction is about 60%. The fraction is often lower in people who have cardiomyopathy or heart failure.

Procedures
Your provider may perform one or more heart procedures to help diagnose cardiomyopathy.

Cardiac catheterization
Cardiac catheterization is a medical procedure used to diagnose and treat some heart conditions. The procedure uses a long, thin, flexible tube called a catheter. A provider puts the tube into a blood vessel in your arm, groin, or upper thigh. Then they thread the tube to your heart.

Heart biopsy
A heart biopsy, or myocardial biopsy  , is used to diagnose some types of cardiomyopathy. A provider removes a very small piece of your heart muscle to check for signs  of cardiomyopathy. This can be done during cardiac catheterization.

Coronary angiography
Coronary angiography uses contrast dye and X-ray pictures to detect blockages in the coronary arteries that are caused by plaque  buildup. Your provider may order this test to see if cardiomyopathy was caused by coronary heart disease.

Cardiomyopathy
Types
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
IN THIS ARTICLE
Dilated cardiomyopathyPeripartum cardiomyopathyHypertrophic cardiomyopathyArrhythmogenic cardiomyopathyRestrictive cardiomyopathyLeft ventricular noncompactionSeptic cardiomyopathy, or sepsis-induced cardiomyopathyTakotsubo cardiomyopathy, or broken heart syndrome
There are several types of cardiomyopathies. They differ based on their cause and how they affect the heart’s structure and function. Some types are rarer than others. All types weaken the heart muscle. Certain types are temporary and get better with time. 

Some people have overlapping cardiomyopathies. For example, a person may have both dilated cardiomyopathy and arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy.

Dilated cardiomyopathy
a healthy heart and a heart with dilated cardiomyopathy. This condition causes the lower chambers of the heart to become larger and weaker.
Dilated cardiomyopathy. This image shows a healthy heart and a heart with dilated cardiomyopathy. This condition causes the lower chambers of the heart to become larger and weaker. Medical Illustration Copyright © Nucleus Medical Media, All rights reserved. 

Dilated cardiomyopathy is a common type of cardiomyopathy that happens when the ventricles (the lower chambers of the heart) weaken and get larger. The weakened  ventricles  don’t pump well, making your heart work harder.


Dilated cardiomyopathy is a condition that occurs when the heart’s left ventricle is enlarged.
 

Peripartum cardiomyopathy
Cardiomyopathy can occur during or after pregnancy. It is called peripartum cardiomyopathy. This condition most often develops late in pregnancy or within a few months after giving birth.

Peripartum cardiomyopathy is rare but serious. Learn what raises your risk and how to recognize the warning  signs  .

Visit the Peripartum Cardiomyopathy page.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy occurs when the heart muscle becomes larger and thicker than normal. The thickened areas can block the ventricles, making it harder for the heart to pump blood. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is commonly  inherited  , and first-degree relatives should be alerted and screened for the disease.

 a healthy heart and a heart muscle that is larger and thicker because of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The image on the left shows a healthy heart. On the right is a heart muscle that is larger and thicker because of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Medical Illustration Copyright © Nucleus Medical Media, All rights reserved.

Why Some People Have Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy but Don't Know It
Scientists estimate that only 1 in 5 people who have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy get diagnosed. The main reason is that they don’t have symptoms, even though their heart muscle has thickened. In these cases, the thickening hasn’t affected blood flow, and symptoms don’t show up if oxygen-rich blood is reaching all parts of the body. Sometimes thickening of the heart muscle is detected when people have imaging tests for other health

Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy is a rare condition that develops when fatty or scarred tissue replaces the normal muscle tissue in the right ventricle. This can cause an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia). Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy usually affects teens or young adults. It increases the risk for cardiac arrest.

Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Restrictive cardiomyopathy is a rare type of cardiomyopathy that causes the ventricles to stiffen. Because of this, the ventricles can’t relax and don’t fill with enough blood to pump to the rest of the body. With restrictive cardiomyopathy, the walls of the heart do not thicken. Transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy is a type of restrictive cardiomyopathy that is more common in Black men.

Left ventricular noncompaction
Left ventricular noncompaction is a rare type of cardiomyopathy. It occurs when the left ventricle develops muscle that is both smooth, as it should be, and loose, like a thick web. The loose muscle can extend into the left ventricle. This weakens the heart muscle and prevents the heart from pumping enough blood to the rest of the body.

Septic cardiomyopathy, or sepsis-induced cardiomyopathy
Sepsis  is a life-threatening condition that results when the body’s response to infection injures its own tissues. Newborns have the highest risk of sepsis. Of every 10 people who get sepsis, between 1 and 7 develop septic cardiomyopathy. This type of cardiomyopathy usually goes away within 10 days if the person recovers from sepsis.

Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, or broken heart syndrome
diagram showing broken heart syndrome
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. A normal heart is on the left. The image on the right is a heart affected by takotsubo cardiomyopathy, or broken heart syndrome. The lower chambers of the heart are enlarged.

Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is a rare condition. It develops when extreme emotional or physical stress causes the heart muscle to stop working properly. This condition affects more women than men and is more common after menopause. Usually, the heart recovers in 3 to 4 weeks with medicine.

Cardiomyopathy
Symptoms
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
Call 9-1-1 if you are having trouble breathing or your symptoms last longer than a few minutes.

Some people with cardiomyopathy never have any  symptoms  . Other people may not have symptoms until their condition gets worse.

Common symptoms include:

Shortness of breath, especially after a large meal
Chest pain, especially after physical activity or a large meal
Tiredness even after resting
Dizziness and fainting
Arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats)
Heart murmur (extra or unusual sounds between heartbeats)
Heart palpitations
If cardiomyopathy has caused heart failure or if you have peripartum cardiomyopathy, symptoms could include swelling of the belly, hands, legs, or feet.

Symptoms in babies and young children may look different. They may experience vomiting; diarrhea; problems with eating or breathing; irritability (crying and fussiness); fainting; swelling of the arms, legs, or belly; extreme sleepiness; or poor growth.

Cardiomyopathy
Causes and Risk Factors
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
What causes cardiomyopathy?
Cardiomyopathy can be  inherited  , acquired, or  congenital  .

Inherited means that your parents passed the  gene  for the disease on to you. Gene  mutations  can cause your heart not to develop properly. Mutations are changes in the genes that control how your heart is formed. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy are often inherited.
Acquired means that you weren't born with the disease, but you developed it due to another disease or condition. Conditions that damage your heart can lead to acquired cardiomyopathy.
Congenital means that your condition was present at birth. You may have cardiomyopathy at birth, or it can result from a congenital heart defect. Congenital cardiomyopathy may result from health conditions of the mother or the developing baby that are not inherited.
Cardiomyopathy may also be a  symptoms  of another condition. Many times, the cause is not known.

What raises the risk of cardiomyopathy?
People of any age, race, or ethnicity can have cardiomyopathy. Sometimes, lifestyle habits or other medical conditions raise your risk of cardiomyopathy. You can reduce risks by controlling lifestyle risks.

Lifestyle risk factors
You can take steps to lower your risk of cardiomyopathy:

Reduce the amount of alcohol you drink. Heavy drinking is linked with cardiomyopathy.For women, heavy drinking is defined as more than seven alcoholic drinks per week. For men, heavy drinking is defined as more than 14 drinks per week. Even moderate use of alcohol for more than 10 years is linked with cardiomyopathy. (Moderate use means no more than two drinks a day for men and no more than one drink a day for women.) Drinking less is better for health than drinking more. Learn more about the health effects of drinking alcohol. Visit the website of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
Avoid cocaine, amphetamines, or anabolic-androgenic steroids unless prescribed by your provider. Some substances can damage the heart muscle. This damage increases the risk of cardiomyopathy and cardiac arrest. There is some evidence that marijuana can raise your risk for takotsubo cardiomyopathy.
Minimize very stressful situations. You can’t avoid all sources of stress in your life, but you may be able to lower your stress level with counseling or support from loved ones. Extreme stress can raise your risk of takotsubo cardiomyopathy, also called broken heart  syndrome  , especially if you have other risk factors.
Keep up to date on vaccines. Infections raise the risk of septic cardiomyopathy and other heart injuries that cause heart damage.

3-d diagram of skeleton, showing brain and heart
The Link Between Mental Stress and Heart Health
The NHLBI supports research showing how mental stress affects the heart. Researchers are studying how stress can raise your risk for serious health problems or even death. 

View the article
Risk factors you can’t control
Age: Some types of cardiomyopathy are more common in certain age groups.
Septic cardiomyopathy is more common in newborns.
Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy is more common in teens and young adults.
Dilated cardiomyopathy is more common in adults between 20 and 60 years old.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is more common in people in their 30s.
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is more common in women after menopause.
Family history of cardiomyopathy or other heart conditions
Race:Black people have a risk of dilated cardiomyopathy that’s nearly three times higher than that of White people.
Chemotherapy or radiation treatment for  cancer 
Other medical conditions:
Pregnancy
Diseases that affect how well your muscles work, such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Diseases that cause substances to build up in your heart, such as sarcoidosis or amyloidosis
Heart inflammation
Infections, such as viral hepatitis, HIV, and COVID-19
Obesity, diabetes, or other problems with your  metabolic  system
 Sepsis  , a life-threatening condition that results when the body’s response to infection injures its own tissues
Thyroid disease and other problems with your  hormone  levels
Can you prevent cardiomyopathy?
You may be able to prevent acquired cardiomyopathy or help lower your risk of problems.

Make heart-healthy lifestyle changes. These changes include choosing heart-healthy foods, being physically active, aiming for a healthy weight, quitting smoking, getting quality sleep, and managing stress. Also, avoid drinking too much alcohol and using substances such as cocaine.
Get treatment for medical conditions that can cause cardiomyopathy or make your condition worse.
Prevent infections by keeping up to date on vaccinations.
Reduce sources of stress in your life. Learn about ways to cope with stress.
There is no way to prevent inherited cardiomyopathy. However, you can take steps to keep it from getting worse and lower your risk of serious health problems. Working with a genetic  counselor can give you information about the risk of your children inheriting a gene for cardiomyopathy.

Good pre-pregnancy and prenatal care can help pregnant women lower the risk that their babies will be born with congenital cardiomyopathy.

Cardiomyopathy
Treatment
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
If you have cardiomyopathy but don't have  symptoms  , you may not need treatment. Some types that occur suddenly, such as dilated cardiomyopathy or takotsubo cardiomyopathy, may go away on their own.

If your healthcare provider recommends treatment, your treatment plan will depend on the type of cardiomyopathy you have, how serious it is, and whether you have any complications. Talk with your provider about your needs and goals so the treatment plan will work for you.

Treatment for cardiomyopathy might not cure the problem with your heart. The main goals of treatment are to:

Control your symptoms so that you can have a good quality of life
Manage any medical conditions that caused cardiomyopathy
Prevent serious problems, such as cardiac arrest or cardiogenic shock
Stop cardiomyopathy from getting worse
Your treatment may include medicines, procedures, and devices. Patients with cardiomyopathy or heart failure should see a cardiologist consultation to help manage their disease. A cardiologist is a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating heart disease.

Be sure to let your provider know if you're planning a pregnancy, if you are pregnant, or if you're breastfeeding. Not all medicines and procedures are safe for people who are pregnant or feeding breastmilk to a baby.

Medicines
The following medicines can help treat symptoms of different types of cardiomyopathies.

Medicines to remove extra  sodium  and fluid from your body: These include diuretics and aldosterone antagonists. These medicines lower the amount of blood that the heart must pump. Very high doses of diuretics may cause low blood pressure  ,  kidney disease  , and worsening heart failure symptoms. Side effects of aldosterone antagonists can include kidney disease and high potassium levels.
Medicines to relax your blood vessels and help your heart pump blood: These include angiotensin-converting  enzyme  inhibitors, angiotensin II  receptor  blockers, and combination hydralazine/isosorbide dinitrate, which is used to treat heart failure in Black people. An angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor may be used to treat people who have developed heart failure. To treat heart failure with an ejection fraction less than 45%, providers may prescribe vericiguat to reduce hospitalizations and improve survival. Possible side effects include headaches, cough, low blood pressure, and kidney disease.
Medicines to slow your heart rate: Providers may prescribe beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, or ivabradine to help correct a heartbeat that's too fast or is irregular (arrhythmia). They make it easier for your heart to pump blood. Possible side effects include a slow or irregular heart rate, high blood pressure, and vision problems. These medicines can also make some arrhythmias worse.
Medicines to balance your  electrolyte  levels: These can help your heart work better. Side effects include kidney disease and high potassium levels in your blood.
Blood thinners (anticoagulants): These medicines help prevent blood clots  . However, they can raise your risk of serious bleeding.
Digoxin: This is used to treat a fast or irregular heartbeat. Digoxin can cause nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. It may also cause some types of arrhythmias.
Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors: These medicines are often used to treat diabetes but can also help your heart work better. Possible side effects include kidney disease and infections.
Medicine to relax the heart muscle: If you have obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, your provider may prescribe a type of medicine called mavacamten. It can improve your quality of life and reduce symptoms. Mavacamten may raise the risk of heart failure, so only people who have an ejection fraction of at least 55% are eligible for this treatment.
Complementary and alternative treatments: Studies show that some dietary supplements and foods can reduce symptoms of cardiomyopathy and heart failure. Talk with your provider about the possible benefits of nutritional supplements, vitamins, and minerals. Be sure to discuss any nutritional supplements you're already taking. Some may interfere with other treatments or cause side effects.
Procedures and implanted devices
Talk with your provider about a procedure or device if medicines don't help improve your symptoms.

Alcohol septal ablation
Septal ablation  shrinks the septum (the muscle dividing the left and right lower chambers of the heart). This may help your heart work better. It is used only to treat hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Learn what the heart looks like.

Septal myectomy
If you have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and your symptoms are serious, your provider may remove part of the thickened septum. This heart surgery may help your heart work better. You will be asleep during the procedure. NHLBI scientists are developing ways to remove part of the thickened septum using cardiac catheterization instead of surgery.

Catheter ablation
Catheter ablation is a procedure to stop faulty electrical signals from moving through your heart and causing an irregular heartbeat.

Ablation is done with cardiac catheterization. Your provider will pass flexible tubes, or catheters, through your blood vessels until they reach your heart. The catheters can locate the source of your abnormal heartbeats. Other catheters can deliver treatments. Your provider will aim the tip of a special catheter at the small area of heart tissue. A machine will use energy or extremely cold temperatures to create a scar on the heart. The scar prevents abnormal electrical signals from causing an irregular heartbeat.

Catheter ablation has some risks both during the procedure and during recovery, including bleeding, infection, and damage to the heart or blood vessels.

Medical devices
Cardiomyopathy increases the risk of life-threatening events such as cardiac arrest or cardiogenic shock. If you have complications, such as an arrhythmia or heart failure, you may need a surgically implanted device, such as a left ventricular assist device, an implanted cardioverter defibrillator (ICD), or a pacemaker to help keep you safe.

Another type of implantable device allows providers to remotely check heart function in people who have worsening symptoms linked with heart failure. Your provider will insert the monitoring device in a blood vessel using cardiac catheterization. The implanted monitor can help improve quality of life by reducing hospitalizations.

If you're waiting for surgery for a heart transplant or to implant an ICD, your provider may recommend a wearable cardioverter vest. Some people may use a vest for a while if they have a type of cardiomyopathy, such as peripartum cardiomyopathy, that is likely to get better.

Heart transplant
You may need a heart transplant if you have life-threatening symptoms or complications of cardiomyopathy, and no other treatments have worked for you.

A transplant may improve your quality of life and prolong your lifespan. Your transplant team removes your diseased heart and replaces it with a healthy heart from a deceased donor.

After the surgery, you will recover in the hospital's intensive care unit and stay in the hospital for up to 3 weeks. During your recovery, you may start a cardiac rehabilitation program.

Heart transplant has some serious risks. Your provider will closely watch your health after the transplant. You'll need to take medicines for the rest of your life. Despite the risks, heart transplant has a good success rate. About 90% of patients who received heart transplants in 2020 were still alive a year later.